Um,
[laughter]
>> that's how we that's how we do it in the
YouTube world.
>> Just a clap.
>> We don't have slates. [music]
>> John Green and his brother Hank have
been making YouTube videos [music] for
almost as long as there's been a
YouTube.
>> Good morning, Hank. It's Thursday.
>> Good morning, John. It's Thursday.
>> I'll see you on Friday.
>> Over nearly 20 years, they've built a
devoted audience of millions who've
watched them vlog about topics big.
>> Bad news. Uh, one, it's cancer
>> and small.
>> I'm just gonna say it. I hate pennies
>> and even about giraffe sex.
>> I don't [music] know what that says
about the YouTube community. I guess it
just says that we're people who love
giraffes who love giraffes.
>> The brother's YouTube channel, Vlog
Brothers, led to spin-off channels,
charity [music] work, a video
conference, and more. All while John
Green's career as a fiction writer was
simultaneously taking off. In 2012, his
YA novel, The Fault in Our Stars, became
a mega bestseller, which in turn led to
a movie adaptation that was also a
global hit.
>> You think that the only way to lead a
meaningful life is for [music] everyone
to remember you, for everyone to love
you.
>> The Fault in Our Stars showcases [music]
Green's empathetic gift for speaking the
emotional language of teens. In a time
of widespread disconnection and
hopelessness, his writing dares to stay
hopeful. [music]
>> So, for me, hope is not like some
abstract consideration. It's sort of a
prerequisite for my survival.
>> Green has recently turned to global
health with this year's non-fiction
bestseller, Everything is Tuberculosis.
But Green himself has battled over the
years with his own feelings of
disconnection [music]
from his fiction writing, his fans, and
his sense of purpose. Here's my
conversation with John Green. [music]
>> John, thank you for taking the time to
speak with me today. I appreciate it.
>> It's a pleasure.
>> I'm just going to start with a heavy
question. So I I I I think underneath a
lot of your work uh whether it's fiction
or uh non-fiction or online content um
is the idea of hope and uh I saw
somewhere that you said hope is the
correct response to consciousness.
>> Yeah.
>> So what does that mean? And also where
are you with hope right now when we're
in a moment that you know certainly um
[clears throat] you know could en
encourage a lot of hopelessness.
>> Yeah. Well, I think despair is a daily
presence in my life and something that I
have to try to ward off using all of the
magic and meaning that I can find. And
uh you know I've lived with major
depression in my life. I I I have pretty
severe OCD. have a lot of anxiety and I
can't afford despair. I really can't. I
don't think humanity can afford despair
because the problem with despair is all
it does is make more of itself, right?
Like I wouldn't have an issue with
despair if it caused me to be like a
better human or a better dad or
whatever. But despair for me just sort
of like sinks me deeper and deeper into
the couch. And that is my kind of daily
temptation. I I keep in my wallet a
little note that says, "The year you
graduated from high school, 12 million
children died under the age of five, and
last year fewer than 5 million did."
That's still way too many. It's still an
absolute indictment of humanity that we
allow so many children to die every
year. And yet, at the same time, the
progress is real. And I think holding
those two competing ideas together is
the great challenge of my my life.
>> Do you think hope uh um sort of
multiplies itself in the way that
despair does? I think it can. Um I don't
know that it always does. I mean the
problem the problem with with hope is
that it feels like an very easy word.
You know, it feels like very convenient
and
>> sort of uh kumbaya. But I'm interested
in the kind of hope that holds up to
scrutiny. The kind of hope that that
does hold up to the worst things that
happen to us that holds up to our worst
days. That's the kind of hope that I'm
interested in. And that's much harder to
come by. I mean, you can't just um you
can't just feel hope and then uh let
that feeling pass over you with with joy
and pleasure. You have to take it into
the real world. You have to, you know,
you have to see that hope in action.
>> And I'm also um curious about the
connections between hope and suffering.
Um, I know that when you were a much
younger man, you were a chaplain in a
children's hospital, um, and witnessed a
lot of, um, I I would say maybe
incomprehensible suffering. How did you
take ex opportunities for hope from like
all the unhopful experiences you had?
because I could very easily imagine
somebody working in a children's
hospital and seeing you know kids die
from cancer and and then you know sort
of leaning towards despair rather than
leaning into hope.
>> Yeah. And I think that's I think that's
fairly common. I mean look it it it
working at the hospital is the axis
mundi around which my life spins. You
know that that six months is the most
important six months of of my life in a
lot of ways because I was on one clear
trajectory. I was going to become an
Episcopal minister and then suddenly I I
wasn't. And I wasn't because my
experiences at the hospital so
fundamentally challenged my
understanding of the universe, my
understanding of God that I I just
couldn't go through with it. I had to
move forward with a different life. And
so I don't want to pretend that like I
emerged from that feeling all hopeful
and happy. I emerged from it feeling
scared and overwhelmed and devastated by
what I I'd seen and by the reality that
suffering is not just unjustly
distributed but fundamentally unjust in
its in the in the fact of it.
>> Is there a particular experience from
your time at the hospital that that uh
maybe set you on a on a different path?
There was a really bad fire that where I
was on call for the fire and it was four
four kids and and and two of them died
and two of them were very badly burned
and um
you know there's not much to say about
that except that um trying to be with
people in in that moment of devastation
is is difficult. obviously not nearly as
difficult as it is to live through but
trying to um you know support people in
that moment is really hard work. There
is no reason for children to die. Uh you
know I I had a religion professor once
who told me there is a law that says
that no parent should bury a child and
someone needs to enforce it. And that's
how I felt coming out of the hospital
like there was no one enforcing that
law. But
um a lot of the questions that
interested me before the hospital just
don't interest me anymore. I'm not
really interested for instance in the
question of like whether God is really
real or whatever. Like um the question
that's important to me is is how can we
work together to bring about the world
that God as I understand it wants us to
have. Why does what you just described,
why does it not fit within sort of the
religious or intellectual purview of of
being a minister? Like what what was the
disconnect you felt that uh uh precluded
you continuing on that path?
>> I'll be honest, there's two things. So,
first off, uh, on a very functional,
practical level, I was in a church
basement with my mentor and he was
ordering candles out of a catalog. And I
was like, "Wait a second. This isn't all
just like worshiping God and like
helping people and ministering to
people. You have to order candles
through a catalog." And I was like,
"That's a deal breaker for me." Like, I
can't do that. And it's I I still
>> Because it was too mundane or like you
just didn't
>> It's just the kind of thing that I'm bad
at, David. like I'm not [laughter] good
at ordering candles and I I'm still not
good at it. So that was like one thing,
but then there was the much deeper kind
of philosophical theological thing which
is that I felt like there were aspects
of the liturgy that I would be asked to
repeat as good news that I just wasn't
sure I I believed. you know, in in
thinking about your your work and your
experiences again, whether it's in in
fiction and uh like for example, in in
the the fault in our stars, writing
about um teenagers who uh are extremely
ill or in your most recent uh uh book,
Everything is Tuberculosis, writing
about sort of um global scale illness.
Um, you know, again, they they they both
connect for me to the idea of suffering.
Um, and and I
I'm just curious if you feel like you're
drawn to suffering.
>> I feel like I'm drawn to
uh people who are suffering and trying
to make sense of suffering and trying to
be with people in a meaningful way who
are who are going through difficulty. I
I've always felt like that. I don't know
why.
>> What's your hunch about why you're drawn
to it?
>> Well, it's a big deal, for lack of a
better term, you know? I mean, suffering
is a big big deal. And um it's a huge
part of of the human experience. And
it's a part we often
>> deny or minimize or attempt to look away
from. And in doing that, I worry that
sometimes we deny or minimize or look
away from the humanity of people who are
suffering. And then also in my own life,
I've, you know, known some suffering. I
I've I I've
you know, I haven't been dying before,
but I have been really sick before. I've
been um really scared before. And and so
I'm also grappling with it on a personal
level.
>> And h how much do you think one can um
prepare for suffering? you know, f for
example, you just described uh
experiencing suffering in in your own
life. Did that experience or or even
your sort of
artistic experiences in any way help you
with having, for example, your your
brother and best friend Hank uh
have to deal with a a cancer diagnosis a
few years ago?
Nothing prepared me for Hank getting
cancer. And I remember
walking
when I found out he had cancer before we
knew what kind of cancer, which is a
terrifying couple of weeks, I went for
this walk through the woods just knowing
that being in in the forest would would
calm me down a little bit. And I could
barely put one foot in front of the
other. I remember thinking,
you know, you've been with so many
people who had this experience and it
has in no way helped you have this
experience.
So yeah, I don't think it helps really
to be honest with you. Um, and you know,
if if um
your work and your experiences sort of
in no way um was able to prepare you for
for your experience with Hank who is
doing uh fine right now. Is that is that
right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I would say better
than fine.
>> Better than fine.
>> It's It's hard to slow Hank Green down.
Yeah.
>> But if if your uh sort of experience
were um sort of, you know, ultimately
ineffectual when it came came to your um
situation with your with your brother.
What do you think the implications of
that are for your work
generally? Like is it is it h how much
can it help other people and how much
does it ultimately just have to be about
you expressing
what you need to express?
>> Well, I think art does help us feel less
alone. I really believe that. But I also
think that like one of the reasons I
stopped writing fiction was because I
forgot or didn't understand like what
fiction was for anymore. Um, and so, you
know, when you write a non-fiction book
about tuberculosis, you know exactly
what you're trying to do, which is raise
attention to the fact that 1.5 million
people are dying every year of a disease
we've known how to cure since the 1950s.
When you're writing fiction, I think the
mission is a lot more complex and uh,
amorphous and abstract. When fiction
works for me, it's because I'm also
bringing my deepest self to the story
just like the writer did. I'm bringing
my own experiences of loss and grief.
I'm bringing my own joys and hopes to
the novel. And there is a magic in that.
I think fiction can be transformative.
But I also think that, you know, part of
the reason I haven't written a novel in
8 years is because I lost track of how
that works.
>> The the way you put it was when I
stopped writing fiction. Do you do you
mean that definitively?
>> No, not at all. In fact, I'm writing
fiction now.
>> So, what were um some of the things that
you lost track of and how did you find
them again that's in a way that's
allowed you to go back to fiction? I
wasn't sure what role that my novels
could play in the moment in which I
found myself, [sighs]
you know, starting in in 2018.
Another factor
for sure is that lots of readers were
inevitably reading me into my stories
and that was very uncomfortable and
difficult for me and hard for me to
navigate. I mean, I wrote a novel about
a girl with OCD. I also have OCD.
um navigating the distance between that
girl and me became very complicated and
fraught in a world where everyone
assumed that my OCD was identical to A's
OCD.
So you you uh wrote the fault in our
stars in 2012 and then that that book
you know wasn't just a bestseller which
would have been a dream come true for
for any author. was sort of this
world eating mega bestseller. The
numbers I've seen are like 20 million
copies sold or something like completely
>> wild like that. Um,
which I think is a is a level of success
like way beyond what any writer who's
not like a crazy uh egoomaniac can
reason reasonably uh expect. So, h how
did that level of of success change how
you think about what you
could do moving forward?
Well, on the one hand, it offered me a
tremendous amount of freedom because the
fallen stars was so successful that I
didn't need to write another book. I was
able to
write exactly the book I wanted exactly
when I wanted. So on that level, you
know, it was it was wonderful. And then
it was also wonderful on the level of
reaching so many readers and having
readers respond so generously to the
book and, you know, share it with their
friends and their parents and their
kids. And but there's another level at
which it's it's difficult. Um,
you know, when you're when you're up
when you're up near the center of US pop
culture, it's not an entirely pleasant
experience, at least for me. Um, it's
sort of like being at the top of a
mountain where there isn't much oxygen.
I I wanted to get off the top of the
mountain pretty pretty quickly to be
honest with you. And um, yeah, it parts
of it were really difficult, parts of it
were really hard. um you know we had to
move like people would come to our house
lots of things in our lives changed that
that we didn't necessarily want to have
change but
I I looking back I feel nothing but
gratitude for that experience because
the book has reached so many people and
it's given me lots of opportunities that
I could never have dreamt of.
>> Um I want to uh just briefly move to an
idea that's connected more to to uh
everything is tuberculosis.
um which you know of course is is not
just about tuberculosis. It's also uh
about global health. Um and and uh you
know it's undeniable that the the Trump
administration in various ways has has
pulled back from uh sort of aiding
global health and and I think there are
all sorts of um you know to varying
degrees of plausibility all sorts of
political or or economic arguments that
could be made for why the Trump
administration is you know dismantling
USA ID. H how do you understand the
Trump administration's
moral or philosophical attitude when it
comes to making moves like that? I I was
talking to a friend not that long ago
about this uh same subject and you know
his his attitude was well that's what
evil is. Now to to my mind that's maybe
an exaggeration. I don't know if I
understand it as evil, but like how do
you understand the decision to make
moves that do result in more suffering?
>> Where do you think it comes from? What
motivates it?
>> Well, I I would say that the belief that
some human lives have more value than
others is the root of all evil. And this
is clearly an expression of that belief.
[sighs]
I
I don't understand it. I I I guess I
understand it as a a belief that
the United States with its limited
resources should focus on the needs of
the United States.
But that is such a narrow-minded way to
think about the how the United States
became the the country that it has
become in terms of its power, in terms
of its relative wealth, in terms of its
um ability to
uh have some say in what happens in the
world. you know, if you want to be uh I
if you want to take a sort of
traditional conservative approach to it,
it's the best use of soft power that the
United States has has ever had. If you
want to take a moral philosophical
approach to it, the the US is directly
responsible for saving tens of millions
of lives through PEPAR, its support of
the Global Fund and USAD.
And so
it's something that traditionally I
think Americans have had real cause to
feel feel proud about the dismantling of
USID, the questions around support for
the global fund, the questions around
support for PEPAR,
it's just devastating. And and so, you
know, for for me, I guess I I guess to
be honest, like I I can't look back
because if I look back, I feel such
grief and [snorts] such anger. I can
only look forward and try to say, okay,
well, given given the world in which we
now live, what can we do together?
>> I want to turn now to the the subject of
YouTube and and the work you do there.
And you know there there's all sorts of
evidence that you know social media and
and and watching videos and sort of uh
living online is um bad for young
people. I think there's very little
evidence that it's good for them. And so
so do do you
>> have any any ambivalence about
participating in an ecosystem that might
just generally not be good for
kids and teens.
>> Yeah. I made a video a while back called
Am I Cigarettes? Where I wondered if um
>> just by creating content on the social
internet I might be a sort of form of
tobacco consumption. I do have a lot of
ambivalence about it and I I I go back
and forth on it a lot. Um there have
been years where I really didn't use the
social internet except for YouTube and
then there have been years where I used
it a lot and the years where I didn't
use it much were happier years for me.
>> Um or where did you land on the question
of am I cigarettes?
Yeah, I mean, um, I I I came off I I I
came out of that video quite unsure as
to whether I'm cigarettes. My brother
then made a follow-up video where he was
like, "We're food and there's a lot of
>> bad food out there. Um, but hopefully
we're good food." And I thought that was
a good point. I think that abandoning
the space is probably the wrong
response. I do think that that YouTube
has become a really productive place to
share educational resources to lower
barriers to educational access for
people. And so I I feel less ambivalence
about about using that space and our
particular community I think um is
really is really important for a lot of
people. It's really it's it's a it's a
big part of their identity and I think
the work we do together is is useful and
important
>> in in uh your the non-fiction book that
you you published before everything is
tuberculosis uh the an anthroposine
reviewed um
>> yeah what a title [laughter]
>> can you can you pronounce that word more
smoothly than than I can
>> I mean only via practice
>> wait say it right now
>> anthroposine
>> oh that was much better you know the
book consists of it's it's sort of a uh
short essays where you know you review
all sorts of things in the world and
then at the end give them the give them
a star rating. Um and one of the uh
reviews is of the internet which you uh
gave a rating of three out of five
stars. And [snorts] at the end of of
that review that essay you you um you
ask a bunch of rhetorical questions uh
including uh what does it mean to have
my way of thinking and my way of being?
so profoundly shaped by machine logic.
What does it mean that having been part
of the internet for so long, the
internet is also part of me?
>> Um,
I want to know your answers to to those
questions. What what happens to you when
the internet becomes a big part of who
you are and what you do? I think the
easy answer is that the internet when
the internet becomes part of you, you
seed a certain amount of your overall
sense of self to online experience,
which can be wonderful in some ways,
right? Like I mean, how else you know I
was, this is going to surprise you,
David, but I was a big nerd when I was a
kid and
I would have
>> I had you pegged for captain of the
football team, right? [laughter]
I would have loved to be able to connect
with young people the way that young
people can connect with each other now
across time and space around shared
affinities or shared interests, right?
Like it would have been amazing for me
to have a relationship with other people
who were obsessed with collecting every
version of the 1986 Chicago Cubs uh
baseball cards. The internet has has
facilitated communication in in lots of
really beautiful ways.
And then there is the cost. And I feel
like I have lived both sides of that
coin.
>> Tell me tell me more about how you've
lived both sides of that coin.
>> Well, you weren't on Tumblr in 2012 when
Tumblr loved me, but you also weren't on
Tumblr in 2014 when Tumblr didn't love
me as much. Um, is what I I guess I
would say.
>> What What was going on in 2014?
Um just a lot of like uh bad faith
interpretations of of my work I would
say.
>> Yeah. Was any of that illuminating?
>> No.
>> No. [laughter]
uh a and uh you know I I think with sort
of the the rise of of YouTube and and uh
social media you know that's also
resulted in a rise in young people of
wanting to be on YouTube and obviously
on on social media and uh is there
something that that you as as a public
figure wish that teens means understood
about what it means to be to to put
yourself out there publicly.
>> Well, I understand the urge to have
outside affirmation. I think that's
something we all have. And I think when
when we're young, we have it perhaps
most profoundly. I know that when I was
a teenager, I wanted to be known and
loved and um and and
you know, being famous on the internet
feels like a wonderful shortcut to that.
It feels like everyone knows you and
everyone loves you, but in fact, no one
knows you. So, I think there's a lot to
recommend making stuff online for
people. I love it. I'm very grateful
that I get to do it every week. I've
been doing it every week since 2007. I
want to do it every week for as as long
as I I can do it in a way that feels
productive and helpful.
I also think that there the feeling that
somehow
being
famous or
achieving a 100,000 subscribers or a
million subscribers or whatever number
of subscribers feels like it will fill
the hole inside of you. It will not. Um
there is no filling the hole inside of
you with the internet. Well, I don't
want to say that. That's not always
true. Let me let me That's a great
question. Let me think about how to
answer it more honestly.
Um, I think that I I think there's a lot
to recommend about being a YouTuber, but
I also think that um
being famous when you're especially when
you're young is really disorienting.
>> What was the uh what were you saying in
your answer that felt dishonest?
uh
just that like I I I don't know what
it's like to get famous when I'm 16 and
so like it's not my job to preach to
them. In a couple ways, we've uh touched
on uh without saying the word, touched
on um the subject of anxiety. Uh and you
know, it's it's uh well, I mean, the
success of Jonathan Hates's book, right,
The Anxious Generation, I think speaks
to to a a real uh feeling that people
have that that um you know, that our our
kids are more anxious than than they
used to be. Um
>> yeah, but I was anxious way before they
were.
>> Well, and so this this is this is uh uh
related to to my question as you know as
as
someone who who
has has really struggled with anxiety.
Um do what and I'm sure you get these
kinds of questions, but what what do you
say to to young people when they want to
know how to try to reduce or or manage
anxiety?
It's really hard. I mean, living with
intense anxiety is the hardest thing
I've ever done. Um, it's it's really
hard. And I think that's the first thing
is acknowledging that it's really hard.
And that acknowledging that surviving it
is itself a win. I I find that I find
going outside helpful. I find exercise
helpful. I find um even though it makes
me anxious in the short run, I find
being with other people helpful because
it you know a lot of the things that
make me feel less anxious in the moment
make me feel more anxious in the long
run. So if I'm at a party, I'm already
anxious because who wants to go to a
party? But I I I I sometimes will deal
with that anxiety by like getting on my
phone and that makes me feel better in
the moment, but it actually makes me
feel worse in the long run. What makes
>> You mean being on your phone at the
party?
>> At the party. Yeah.
>> What makes me feel better in the long
run is engaging with other human beings
as I find them, even though that causes
me more initial anxiety. And so I've
learned over the years to try to do that
stuff, to take my medication every day,
to do all the stuff that I'm supposed to
do, the stuff that science says works.
But it's still really hard. Like,
I mean, you know, I'm fairly anxious now
because this is a weird circumstance.
Um, but I'll be much more anxious when
it is over because I'll be hyper
analyzing everything I said and
everything I didn't say and then yada
yada yada. So, it's just it's just
something that I live with, you know,
like there are harder things to live
with, I'm sure. It's funny because
anytime things are good and things are
relatively good right now, I understand
that that's temporary. And then when
things are bad, that feels very
permanent. Like when I'm in in, you
know, dealing with really high anxiety
every day, it feels like that's going to
be forever. or if I'm dealing with major
depression, it feels like that's going
to be forever. So, it's easy for me to
tell myself it's temporary when things
are good. It's really hard to remind
myself that that it's temporary when
things are bad.
Yeah, it that's sometimes uh it can feel
like a an unfortunate quirk of uh
evolution that our our brains can I
think tend to fixate on
>> uh threats uh much more than much more
than they're likely to fixate on uh you
know possible positive things.
>> I often think about what it would be
like to be a different mammal and how
then I would also be always responding
to threats. Like if I was a squirrel, I
would also be in a constant state of
worry and fear. And that worry and fear
would be completely justified just as my
current worry and fear is. Like I'm
right to be afraid of dying. Like I am
going to die. And that is a super weird
thing to have happen to a being with a
consciousness. Like [snorts] I'm not
wrong to be panicked the same way that
like squirrels aren't wrong to be
panicked when they're crossing the
street. It just doesn't happen to be
helpful. H how did um or how has um
being a parent affected your your own
anxieties?
>> Pretty profoundly. I mean, you know,
there's there's the old cliche that your
heart beats outside of your chest. And
that's that's true in some ways.
>> Uh and so, you know, I I I I worry
intensely for my kids. It's it's
impossible not to. I I um
I've never had a job so interesting and
I've never had a job so hard as being a
parent.
>> Have your kids read your books?
>> No. No. And I don't think they have any
interest in it. I mean, I didn't care
what my dad did when I was a kid, and I
don't think they care much what their
dad does, and that's that suits me just
fine.
>> I know. It's pretty great. It's
humbling, isn't it?
>> Oh, yeah. And like, but like I mean, why
would they? [laughter] Like I mean I
don't uh you know I um like I said I was
not uh I mean I knew that I knew what my
dad's job was but I didn't think about
him.
>> Yeah.
>> You know the whole point of having a
good dad is that you don't have to think
about them very much.
>> Just just be there. [laughter]
>> Yeah. Um there's a a a this is a sort of
a tangential thing but I think it was in
the a New Yorker profile of you from I
don't know when that that probably came
out almost 10 years ago something like
that. Um, the writer was writing about
how uh you were studying uh creative
writing in college and um you had an
experience where you read a story in
class that had a sex scene in it. Um and
then your professor said, I guess in
front of the whole class, you've never
had sex before, have you? [laughter] Do
you know do you remember the anecdote
that I'm talking about?
>> I barely. Um I haven't told that story
in a long time. I I that's I I
completely forgot that was in the New
Yorker. How horrifying.
>> But you know, of course, the professor,
you know, you said he was right. Do you
>> Yeah. Do you remember what gave it away?
>> No, I mean, [laughter] I don't remember
at all. Um
uh probably just a general
romanticization of uh of of sexuality, I
I would imagine, but I have I have no
idea what gave it away. That's really
funny, though. Um,
yeah, it was uh I remember that class. I
had a great teacher and uh he did say
that in front of the whole class.
>> But then apparently you used to give
class updates on like your progress on
that problem.
>> Oh my god. Did I really? [laughter]
>> That's what's in the story. I thought
>> Oh my god, you're making me You're
making me feel like I'm folding into a
series of increasingly small polygons
until I just disappear. Um
>> I was just wondering like who was this
guy? Who was that guy? Who was that man
at that point in his life where he
>> Oh, David, thank God we all have the
capacity for change and growth. Um,
[laughter]
>> uh, no, I don't remember that at all. I
mean, I remember not having had sex in
college, for sure. Um, but I don't
remember, um,
>> at all. I don't remember talking about
it in class. And I'm duly horrified by
the fact that I did [laughter]
>> cuz my thing was I would, you know, the
idea even the idea of that seems
absolutely mortifying to me. So I was
trying to understand who was the person
who would have done that willingly.
>> Also a little bit in congruous with the
person I believe myself to be. You know
like which is a funny thing like as as
as we get older the stories we tell
about ourselves change of course and you
know when I was when I was young I told
one set of stories about myself and now
like when I tell some of those stories
I'm always like uh no I don't like that
story at all. Like I don't like that
guy. And what what do you think the
story you're telling about yourself now
is?
>> Just a just a just a dad in
Indianapolis, man. Like just uh
>> Don't give me that. Don't No, no, no.
Just a dad in Indianapolis. What?
>> That's the That's the story I'm trying
to tell whether or not it's real or not.
[music]
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So about a week later, John and I
spoke again about why he's so drawn to
writing about young people.
All right, John, thanks for taking the
time to talk with me again. I appreciate
it.
>> Yeah. No, it's my pleasure.
>> When we were talking earlier, you said
that um you know, I think it was around
2018 was the the year you you pointed to
as um being a time when you became
unsure of what role novels could play in
that moment. Um
>> so what was going on?
>> Yeah. Your novels. Your novels. Yes.
Yes. So what
>> other people's novels very useful to me?
>> They didn't [laughter]
what was going on in in that moment that
caused that uncertainty for you?
>> Well, I think some of it was the first
Trump administration, a feeling that
certain aspects of American life that
I'd taken for granted were not to be
taken for granted. I think some of it
was personal. My own struggle, lifelong
struggle with OCD and anxiety.
Um, when I got home from the Turtles All
the Way Down tour, my last novel's tour,
I became quite sick, both physically. I
got this disease called Labyrinthitis,
but also mental health-wise. And so I
think I didn't know how to use my novels
or how to use my fiction to respond to
that moment. And then I also think that
on some level I just I just kind of
forgot what what my novels were for like
what the point of them was. It started
to feel and it started to it started to
feel almost like indulgent I guess to
like just do
this fun stuff all the time.
I don't know.
I think the truth is that part of it was
personal and part of it was
just feeling kind of overwhelmed by the
prospect of publishing for such a broad
audience to be honest with you.
>> Ah,
>> you know, like it's it's it's a great
gig in a lot of ways and one I'm one I'm
very grateful for, but it was also
overwhelming.
A and you also said that um part of the
problem with writing fiction back then
was that uh you were feeling like
because you had a in some ways you had a
public life uh readers were taking
taking that as sort of a an opportunity
to read your work autobiographically
and that that you know you sort of felt
maybe uneasy about that. Um, h have you
have you just
>> decided that's part of the gig now or
you you have you come to terms with that
in some way?
>> I think it's part of the gig and it's a
good gig, right? Like it's easy to focus
on the parts of your job that are hard
or that are not ideal, but I really like
my job. There are aspects of my job I
like less. I mean, that's true for every
job I've ever had. Like every job
involves paperwork, and I hate
paperwork.
>> Or ordering candles.
>> Ordering candles. Yes. Thank you.
[laughter] Exactly.
>> Yeah.
>> I have tried to find the the least
paperworky ordering [snorts] candles
jobs possible, but there is still some
version of ordering candles in every
job. And I I hope that over time I I do
think that taking this break from
fiction has allowed me to think
differently about that stuff that like,
you know, maybe it's okay that they're
going to read me into the story. Maybe
that's inevitable. I read JD Salinger
into Catcher in the Ry even though he
made it very clear he didn't want me to
do that, but I still did. You know, I
still looked for hints of the author in
the story. I I just think that's a human
impulse.
>> Well, you have some Did you try and send
a letter to JD Salinger at some point?
There was some attempt to make contact.
>> You remember a lot more in my life than
I do, David, is you're you've you've
researched it more recently. But um
yeah, I tried to write Salinger a
letter. I read this biography of
Salinger in my high school library. And
then I tried to um I did I wrote him a
letter. I wrote him a letter to like the
address that was on the proto internet,
you know, the like CompuServe 1993
internet. And uh obviously I never got a
response, but I felt really compelled
to tell him
that his book had meant a lot to me.
And I did I don't actually need him to
have read that. I needed to say it. I
don't need him to read it.
>> Yeah. Uh um
you know, whether it's it's your
work in in global health or um you know,
making YouTube videos on any number of
subjects or or uh making podcasts. Um
you know, you're you're doing a lot of
work that is not writing fiction. Um and
>> that's true. A and um you know I I know
for for myself like I I really think of
myself as a writer and I do relatively
little writing anymore. And I was
wondering if um sort of h how that works
for you given that you're making all
this other stuff and like I said kind of
doing less writing than you were doing
15 years ago, 20 years ago. I has your
self-conception changed at all?
>> It has changed a little bit to be
honest. I mean, I I still think of
myself as a writer, but I'm conscious of
the fact that I I spend a lot of time
not writing. I also always had a day
job, though. And so, I try to think of
it as like, well, I like having a day
job. Having a day job is good for me.
It's good for my brain. I like not
writing all the time. If writing was the
only thing I did, I think I'd put a lot
of pressure on myself as a writer, but I
don't think of myself as as certainly as
just a fiction writer anymore. I mean, I
haven't written a novel in almost 10
years, so obviously I'm not primarily a
fiction writer.
You also said something along the lines
of um you know your your fiction tends
to work best when you can bring your
full self to the story that you're
working on. Um and and I thought um
>> like
why is it that you think you're you're
able to bring your full self to the
writing of YA fiction in particular?
Well, I think that for me, my own
teenage years were so important because
so many things happened for the first
time. I lost a friend for the first
time. And so that meant grappling not
just with grief, but with the unjust
distribution of suffering in our world.
I fell in love for the first time, which
meant not just the feelings of falling
in love, but also the way that it sort
of narrows your vision and becomes
overwhelmingly the most important thing
in your life. I, you know, grappled with
the questions of what I owe other people
and and and what I owe myself for the
first time, like independent of my
parents. That time of my life was so
important to me. It was so
I I I I think partly because I was at
boarding school and so I was with my
friends all the time, 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, and my enemies, it
should be noted. partly because I was um
the first
embrace of those feelings is just so
intense. It's so overwhelming. There's
no irony to it. There's no emotional
distance between you and it. Uh there is
only the reality of experience. And I
think in my fiction, I do want to go
back to that. I do want to have that
feeling where like I don't have to have
ironic distance between me and the
question the way that now I do. You you
want to get back to the um to the lack
of ironic distance. Is that that what
you're saying?
>> Yeah. To the
>> Yeah.
>> I want to get I want to get back to
where you look at the stars and you are
truly overwhelmed by the size of the
universe.
And for me that was high school.
>> Yeah. Do do you think you um you could
um sort of approach fiction in the same
way and with this the same level of of
sort of emotional intensity um if you
were writing novels for adults?
>> Well, the novel that I'm working on now
is about and for grown-ups. So, I guess
we'll see.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, we we talked a little bit
earlier about faith and you said that um
you know, you're not really interested
in the question of whether God is real.
Um and
>> that really bugs people. [laughter]
>> I'm sure it does, but this is the
question I have about that. So, uh, you
know, I've, uh, had a couple, you know,
conversations just in in my life with,
uh, well, I'm thinking of one in
particular with a Catholic priest, and
I, uh, sort of presented this idea to
him that, you know, I I feel like I can
have kind of transcendental or, uh,
certainly spiritual or religious like
experiences
without necessarily having to uh,
connect them to a belief in a higher
power or a god. And and
>> you know, this uh father, father Jonah
is his name. Uh I'm sure he wouldn't
mind me talking about this. Said very
respectfully like
>> actually I kind of think belief in the
god is like that's that's the whole
deal. And if you're not there, then
you're kind of you're kind of missing
the point. Um
>> yeah. H
>> how how is that not the case?
>> Or why is it not the case for you?
>> I do hear that. Yeah. I I mean I do hear
that from a lot of theologians and I
think that their experiences of the
numinous or the sacred or or whatever
might be different from mine and theirs
might be contingent upon
um
God being
really real whatever that means for me
those experiences of the sacred of God's
presence of of God's presence in my life
and in the life of the world they are
they are real like I know that they're
real because I have them. And I have
them in prayer. I have them in when I am
overwhelmed by suffering, when I am
overwhelmed by fear. I h I have those
experiences of of the sacred. Whether or
not those those experiences are like m
are constructed by my brain or are are
experiences of a living God is
irrelevant to whether the experience was
real for me. And so what I'm interested
in is like how do I get more of that
experience? That experience of feeling
proximal to the sacred, that experience
of of feeling, you know, close to um a
justice loving God. How do I get more of
that experience? And and how do I bring
about or how do I help in whatever small
way I can bring about the the world that
God would wish to see on earth? And
>> and h how does one get more of the
experience of the sacred? Well, through
practice mostly in my experience. Um, I
think, you know, that's that's why
people who pray a lot have it have it
more.
But also, I mean, I, you know, I was in
this deeply impoverished neighborhood in
Manila with Doctors Without Borders a
couple days ago,
watching these
profoundly committed health care workers
try in very difficult circumstances to
get people access to good care.
And like
that makes me feel close to God. That's
a sacred experience for me.
>> And you know, I think kind of um in ways
both uh explicit and implicit, we've
we've touched uh on the idea of hope
through throughout our conversation and
and uh are there things that
you think adults could learn from teens
about hope?
Well, I think we need to put down our
armor a little bit. Our armor of
cynicism and irony and um thinking that
uh we know about everything that matters
and everything that matters is how well
the minivan handles and how much the
mortgage is. I think we need to put some
of that down sometimes and try to
grapple with the beauty of the world as
young people do um in an open way, in a
vulnerable way.
For me, that's where the real magic is.
I said earlier, and it's cheesy as as
I'll get out, I know, but I said earlier
that when you're lying down with your
friends under under a big sky at night
and you're [music] looking at the stars
and you're conscious of how large the
universe is, that's a really
overwhelming experience. It's a really
borderline, for me, sacred experience.
And
[music] if you lose that in adulthood,
you've lost something really important.
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro.
>> And I'm David Marquesy, [music]
>> and we're the hosts of The Interview, an
audio and video podcast from the New
York Times.
>> Every week, we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.